Chasing Carbon: The Elusive Environmental
Footprint of Computing
Udit Gupta1,2, Young Geun Kim3, Sylvia Lee2, Jordan Tse2,
Hsien-Hsin S. Lee2, Gu-Yeon Wei1, David Brooks1, Carole-Jean Wu2
1Harvard University, 2Facebook Inc., 3Arizona State University
ugupta@g.harvard.edu carolejeanwu@fb.com
Abstract—Given recent algorithm, software, and hardware innovation, computing has enabled a plethora of new applications.
As computing becomes increasingly ubiquitous, however, so does
its environmental impact. This paper brings the issue to the
attention of computer-systems researchers. Our analysis, built on
industry-reported characterization, quantifies the environmental
effects of computing in terms of carbon emissions. Broadly,
carbon emissions have two sources: operational energy consumption, and hardware manufacturing and infrastructure. Although
carbon emissions from the former are decreasing thanks to
algorithmic, software, and hardware innovations that boost
performance and power efficiency, the overall carbon footprint
of computer systems continues to grow. This work quantifies the
carbon output of computer systems to show that most emissions
related to modern mobile and data-center equipment come
from hardware manufacturing and infrastructure. We therefore
outline future directions for minimizing the environmental impact
of computing systems.
Index Terms—Data center, mobile, energy, carbon footprint
I. I NTRODUCTION
The world has seen a dramatic advancement of information and communication technology (ICT). The rise in ICT
has resulting in a proliferation of consumer devices (e.g.,
PCs, mobile phones, TVs, and home entertainment systems),
networking technologies (e.g., wired networks and 3G/4G
LTE), and data centers. Although ICT has enabled applications including cryptocurrencies, artificial intelligence (AI), ecommerce, online entertainment, social networking, and cloud
storage, it has incurred tremendous environmental impacts.
Figure 1 shows that ICT is consuming more and more
electricity worldwide. The data shows both optimistic (top)
and expected (bottom) trends across mobile, networking, and
data-center energy consumption [1], [2]. On the basis of even
optimistic estimates in 2015, ICT accounted for up to 5%
of global energy demand [1], [2]. In fact, data centers alone
accounted for 1% of this demand, eclipsing the total energy
consumption of many nations. By 2030, ICT is projected to
account for 7% of global energy demand. Anticipating the
ubiquity of computing, researchers must rethink how to design
and build sustainable computer systems.
Given the growing energy demand of computing technology,
software and hardware researchers have invested heavily in
maximizing the energy efficiency of systems and workloads.
Optimistic ICT energy projections
Expected ICT energy projections
Networking
Consumer device
Datacenter
7% of global electricity demand
20% of global
electricity demand
Networking
Consumer device
Datacenter
Fig. 1. Projected growth of global energy consumption by information and
computing technology (ICT). On the basis of optimistic (top) and expected
(bottom) estimates, ICT will by 2030 account for 7% and 20% of global
demand, respectively [1].
For instance, between the late twentieth and early twenty-first
centuries, Moore’s Law has enabled fabrication of systems
that have billions of transistors and 1,000× higher energy
efficiency [3]. For salient applications, such as AI [4]–[9],
molecular dynamics [10], video encoding [11], and cryptography [12], systems now comprise specialized hardware accelerators that provide orders-of-magnitude higher performance and
energy efficiency. Moreover, data centers have become more
efficient by consolidating equipment into large, warehousescale systems and by reducing cooling and facility overhead
to improve power usage effectiveness (PUE) [13].
The aforementioned energy-efficiency improvement reduces
the operational energy consumption of computing equipment,
in turn mitigating environmental effects [14], [15]. In addition,
using renewable energy further reduces operational carbon
emissions. Figure 2 (left) shows the energy consumption
(black) and net carbon footprint from purchased energy (red)
for Facebook’s Prineville data center. Between 2013 and 2019,
as the facility expanded, the energy consumption monotonically increased. On the other hand, the carbon emissions
started decreasing in 2017 [16]. By 2019, the data center’s
net operational carbon output reached nearly zero [16], a
direct result of powering it with renewable energy such as
854
2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA)
978-1-6654-2235-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/HPCA51647.2021.00076
2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) | 978-1-6654-2235-2/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/HPCA51647.2021.00076
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Facebook (2018) carbon footprint
Without renewables With renewables
iPhone 3
carbon footprint
iPhone 11
carbon footprint
Opex
(51%) Opex
(14%)
Capex
(49%)
Capex
(86%)
Capex
(82%)
Opex
(18%)
Opex
(65%)
Capex
(35%)
Carbon footprint of
purchase energy
Energy
Fig. 2. Carbon footprint depends on more than just energy consumption
(left). Although the energy consumption of Facebook’s Prineville data center
increased between 2013 and 2019, its net operational carbon output decreased
because of renewable-energy purchases. The carbon-emission breakdown has
shifted from primarily opex-related activities to overwhelmingly capex-related
activities (right). The top two pie charts show the breakdown for the iPhone
3 (2008) versus the iPhone 11 (2019); the bottom two show the breakdown
for Facebook’s data centers with and without renewable energy.
wind and solar. Note, the decrease in net operational carbon
emissions from using renewable energy is not the same as
the data center being powered exclusively with renewable
energy at all times [17]–[19]. The distinction between energy
consumption and carbon footprint highlights the need for
computer systems to directly minimize directly optimize for
environmental impact.
Given the advancements in system energy efficiency and the
increasing use of renewable energy, most carbon emissions
now come from infrastructure and the hardware. Similar to
dividing data-center infrastructure-efficiency optimization into
opex (recurring operations) and capex (one-time infrastructure
and hardware), we must divide carbon emissions into opexand capex-related activities. For the purposes of this work, we
define opex-related emissions as emissions from hardware use
and operational energy consumption; we define capex-related
emissions as emissions from facility-infrastructure construction and chip manufacturing (e.g., raw-material procurement,
fabrication, packaging, and assembly. Figure 2 (top, right)
shows that between 2009 (iPhone 3GS) and 2019 (iPhone
11), most carbon emissions attributable to mobile devices
shifted from opex related to capex related [20], [21]. Similarly,
Figure 2 (bottom, right) shows that in 2018, after having converted its data centers to renewable energy, most of Facebook’s
remaining emissions are capex related [16].
If left unchecked, we anticipate the gap between opex- and
capex-related carbon output will widen in coming years. As
energy efficiency rises along with the use of renewable energy,
opex-related emissions will become a less significant part
of computing’s environmental impact. Increasing application
demand will exacerbate capex-related emissions, however. In
less than two years, Facebook hardware devoted to AI training
and inference has grown by 4× and 3.5×, respectively [22],
[23]. Likewise, to support emerging applications (e.g., AI and
AR/VR) on mobile devices, smartphones today have more
transistors and specialized circuits than their predecessors;
limited by dark silicon [24], the additional hardware exacerbates capex-related carbon footprints. Addressing both opexand capex-related emissions requires fundamentally rethinking
designs across the entire computing stack.
This paper takes a data-driven approach to studying the carbon breakdown of hardware life cycle—including manufacturing, transport, use, and recycling—for consumer devices and
data-center systems. It lays the foundation for characterizing
and creating more-sustainable designs. First, we present the
state of industry practice using the Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
Protocol to quantify the environmental impact of industry
partners and to study the carbon footprint of mobile and
data-center hardware (Section II). On the basis of publicly
available sustainability reports from AMD, Apple, Facebook,
Google, Huawei, Intel, Microsoft, and TSMC, we show that
the hardware-manufacturing process, rather than system operation, is the primary source of carbon emissions (Section III
and IV). Despite the growing use of renewable energy to
power semiconductor manufacturing, hardware manufacturing
and capex-related activities will continue to dominate the
carbon output (Section V). Finally, we outline future research
and design directions across the computing stack that should
enable the industry to realize environmentally sustainable
systems and to reduce the carbon footprint from technology
(Section VI).
The important contributions of this work are:
1) We show that given the considerable efforts over the past
two decades to increase energy efficiency, the dominant
factor behind the overall carbon output of computing has
shifted from operational activities to hardware manufacturing and system infrastructure. Over the past decade, the
fraction of life-cycle carbon emissions due to hardware
manufacturing increased from 49% for the iPhone 3GS to
86% for the iPhone 11.
2) Our smartphone-based measurement shows that efficiently
amortizing the manufacturing carbon footprint of a Google
Pixel 3 smartphone requires continuously running MobileNet image-classification inference for three years—
beyond the typical smartphone lifetime. This result highlights the environmental impact of system manufacturing
and motivates leaner systems as well as longer system
lifetimes where possible.
3) We show that because an increasing fraction of warehousescale data centers employ renewable energy (e.g., solar and
wind), data-center carbon output is also shifting from operation to hardware design/manufacturing and infrastructure
construction. In 2019, for instance, capex- and supplychain-related activities accounted for 23× more carbon
emissions than opex-related activities at Facebook.
4) We chart future paths for software and hardware researchers to characterize and minimize computing technology’s environmental impact. Sustainable computing will
require interdisciplinary efforts across the computing stack.
II. Q UANTIFYING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
The environmental impact of ICT is complex and multifaceted. For instance, technology companies consider many
environmental matters including consumption of energy, water,
and materials such as aluminum, cobalt, copper, glass, gold,
855
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Technology company Scope 1 Scope 2 Scope 3
Chip manufacturer Burning PFCs, chemicals, gases Energy for fabrication Raw materials, hardware use
Mobile-device vendor Natural gas, diesel Energy for offices Chip manufacturing, hardware use
Data-center operator Natural gas, diesel Energy for data centers Server-hardware manufacturing, construction
TABLE I
I MPORTANT FEATURES OF S COPE 1, S COPE 2, AND S COPE 3 EMISSIONS , FOLLOWING THE G REENHOUSE G AS (GHG) P ROTOCOL , FOR SEMICONDUCTOR
MANUFACTURERS , MOBILE - DEVICE VENDORS , AND DATA - CENTER OPERATORS .
tin, lithium, zinc, and plastic. In this paper we focus on a
single important environmental issue: carbon emissions, which
represents total greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions.
This section details the state-of-the-art industrial practices
for quantifying carbon emissions. Our discussion presents
carbon-footprint-accounting methods that serve broadly across
technology companies, including AMD, Apple, Facebook,
Google, Huawei, Intel, Microsoft, and TSMC [16], [25]–
[29]. First we review methods for analyzing organization-level
emissions. Next, we analyze how to use the results of such
analyses across the technology supply chain to develop models
for individual computer systems, including data-center and
mobile platforms. The remainder of the paper builds on these
methods to quantify the carbon output of computer systems.
A. Industry-level carbon-emission analysis
A common method for quantifying organization-level carbon output is the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol [30],
an accounting standard by which many companies report
their carbon emissions. For example, AMD, Apple, Facebook,
Google, Huawei, Intel, and Microsoft publish annual sustainability reports using the GHG Protocol [30]. Our analysis
builds on such publicly available reports. As Figure 3 shows,
the GHG Protocol categorizes emissions into three scopes:
Scope 1 (direct emissions), Scope 2 (indirect emissions from
purchased energy), and Scope 3 (upstream and downstream
supply-chain emissions). We define each one in the context of
technology companies, as follows.
Scope 1 emissions come from fuel combustion (e.g., diesel,
natural gas, and gasoline), refrigerants in offices and data
centers, transportation, and the use of chemicals and gases
in semiconductor manufacturing. Although Scope 1 accounts
for a small fraction of emissions for mobile-device vendors
and data-center operators, it comprises a large fraction for
chip manufacturers. Overall, it accounts for over half the
operational carbon output from Global Foundries, Intel, and
TSMC [25], [26], [31]. Much of these emissions come from
burning perfluorocarbons (PFCs), chemicals, and gases. TSMC
reports that nearly 30% of emissions from manufacturing 12inch wafers are due to PFCs, chemicals, and gases [31]. In
this paper we show that chip manufacturing, as opposed to
hardware use and energy consumption, accounts for most of
the carbon output attributable to hardware systems.
Scope 2 emissions come from purchased energy and heat
powering semiconductor fabs, offices, and data-center operation. They depend on two parameters: the energy that
operations consume and the GHG output from generating
the consumed energy (in terms of carbon intensity—i.e.,
grams of CO2 emitted per kilowatt-hour of energy). Scope
Organization
(e.g., technology company)
GHG emissions
Scope 3 Upstream
Capital&Purchased goods
Employee commuting
Infrastructure
Scope 3 Downstream
Scope 2
Purchased energy
Transportation and distribution
Use of sold goods
Recycling sold goods
Scope 1
Offices and facilities
Raw material combustion
Fig. 3. Many organizations follow the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol to
quantify their environmental impact. This protocol categorizes emissions into
Scope 1 (direct), Scope 2 (indirect), and Scope 3 (upstream and downstream
supply chain).
2 emissions are especially important in semiconductor fabs
and data centers.
Semiconductor companies need copious energy to manufacture chips. Energy consumption, for instance, produces over
63% of the emissions from manufacturing 12-inch wafers
at TSMC [31]. And energy demand is expected to rise,
with next-generation manufacturing in a 3nm fab predicted
to consume up to 7.7 billion kilowatt-hours annually [31],
[32]. TSMC’s renewable-energy target will account for 20% of
its fabs’ annual electricity consumption, reducing its average
carbon intensity. Despite these improvements, this work shows
hardware manufacturing will constitute a large portion of
computing’s carbon footprint.
Scope 2 emissions are also especially important for data
centers. The operational footprint of a data center has two
parameters: the overall energy consumption from the many
servers and the carbon intensity of that energy. Note that the
carbon intensity varies with energy source and grid efficiency.
Compared with “brown” energy from coal or gas, “green”
energy from solar, wind, nuclear, or hydropower produces up
to 30× fewer GHG emissions [33]–[35]. Scope 2 emissions
for a data center therefore depend on the geographic location
and energy grid. In fact, warehouse-scale data centers are
purchasing renewable energy (e.g., solar and wind) to reduce
GHG emissions.
Scope 3 emissions come from all other activities, including
the full upstream and downstream supply chain. They often
comprise employee business travel, commuting, logistics, and
capital goods. For technology companies, however, a crucial
and challenging aspect of carbon footprint analysis is accounting for the emissions from hardware bought and sold. Data
centers, for instance, may contain thousands of server-class
CPUs whose production releases GHGs from semiconductor
fabs. Constructing these facilities also produces GHG emissions. Similarly, mobile-device vendors must consider both
the GHGs from manufacturing hardware (upstream supply
chain) and the use of that hardware (downstream supply
856
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Production Product Transport Product Use End-of-life
Personal
Computing
Datacenter
Procure materials,
integrated circuits,
packaging, assembly
Procure materials,
integrated circuits,
datacenter construction,
packaging, assembly
Transport final product
to consumer
Transport hardware and
equipment to be
assembled on site
Utilization,
Hardware lifetime,
battery efficiency
Utilization,
hardware lifetime,
PUE
Some raw materials
reused
Some raw materials
reused
Capex Capex Opex Capex
Chip manufacturer Mobile Vendor Datacenter
S1, S2 S3 S3-up S3-down S3-up S2
Fig. 4. The hardware life cycle includes production, transport, use,
and end-of-life processing. Opex-related (operational) carbon emissions are
based on use; capex-related emissions results are from aggregating production/manufacturing, transport, and end-of-life processing.
chain). Accurate accounting of Scope 3 emissions requires indepth analysis of GHGs resulting from construction, hardware
manufacturing, and the devices’ frequency of use as well
as mixture of workloads. These characteristics must consider
the lifetime of systems; for example, data centers typically
maintain server-class CPUs for three to four years [13].
Table I summarizes the salient emissions from each category for chip manufacturers, mobile vendors, and data-center
operators.
B. System-level carbon-output analysis
In addition to industry- and organization-level analysis
using the GHG Protocol, carbon output can be computed for
individual hardware systems and components. Knowing the
carbon footprint of individual hardware systems (e.g., serverclass CPUs, mobile phones, wearable devices, and desktop
PCs) not only enables consumers to understand personal
carbon impact but also enables designers to characterize
and optimize their systems for environmental sustainability.
Typically, evaluating the carbon footprint of an individual
hardware system involves life-cycle analyses (LCAs) [36],
including production/manufacturing, transport, use, and endof-life processing, as Figure 4 shows.
Mobile and data-center devices integrate components and IP
from various organizations. The design, testing, and manufacture of individual components (e.g., CPUs, SoCs, DRAM, and
HDD/SSD storage) spreads across tens of companies. Furthermore, mobile devices comprise displays, batteries, sensors, and
cases that contribute to their carbon footprint. Similarly, data
centers comprise rack infrastructure, networking, and cooling
systems; their construction is yet another factor. Quantifying
individual systems requires quantifying GHG emissions across
chip manufacturers, mobile vendors, and data-center operators.
Figure 4 ties the Scope 1 (S1), Scope 2 (S2), Scope 3 upstream
(S3-up), and Scope 3 downstream (S3-down) of technology
companies to hardware manufacturing and operational use.
Note that although LCAs can help determine system-level
emissions, they are lengthy and incur high effort to perform.
Computer systems have four LCA phases:
• Production: carbon emissions from procuring or extracting
raw materials, manufacturing, assembly, and packaging.
Integrated Circuit
Boards & Flexes
Aluminum
Other
iOS
macOS Active
macOS Idle
Other
Product transport
Recycling
Business travel
Assembly
Displays
Electronics
Steel
Manufacturing
Product Use
Fig. 5. Apple’s carbon-emission breakdown. In aggregate, the hardware life
cycle (i.e., manufacturing, transport, use, and recycling) comprises over 98%
of Apple’s total emissions. Manufacturing accounts for 74% of total emissions,
and hardware use accounts for 19%. Carbon output from manufacturing
integrated circuits (i.e., SoCs, DRAM, and NAND flash memory) is higher
than that from hardware use.
• Transport: carbon emissions from moving the hardware to
its point of use, including consumers and data centers.
• Use: carbon emissions from the hardware’s operation, including static and dynamic power consumption, PUE overhead in the data center, and battery-efficiency overhead in
mobile platforms.
• End-of-life: carbon emissions from end-of-life processing
and recycling of hardware. Some materials, such as cobalt
in mobile devices, are recyclable for use in future systems.
For this paper we chose accredited and publicly reported
LCAs from various industry sources, including AMD, Apple,
Google, Huawei, Intel, Microsoft, and TSMC, to analyze the
carbon output of computer systems.
III. E NVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF PERSONAL COMPUTING
Using publicly reported carbon-emission data from industry, this section studies the environmental impact of consumer (personal) computing devices. First, we characterize the
overall carbon emissions of mobile-device developers, such
as Apple, and find that hardware manufacturing dominates
their environmental impact. Next, we examine in detail various
platforms (e.g., mobile phones, wearable devices, personal assistants, tablets, laptops, and desktop PCs) as well as historical
trends. Our analysis considers more than 30 products from
Apple, Google, Huawei, and Microsoft. Finally, we conduct a
case study on tradeoffs between mobile performance, energy
efficiency, and carbon emissions for an example AI inference
workload. The results demonstrate that software and hardware
researchers should revisit mobile design to build platforms that
are more efficient and environmentally sustainable.
A. Overall breakdown of mobile vendors
Takeaway 1: Hardware manufacture and use dominate the
carbon output of personal-computing companies (e.g., Apple).
More emissions come from designing and manufacturing integrated circuits (e.g., SoCs, DRAM, and storage) than from
hardware use and mobile energy consumption.
857
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Figure 5 shows the breakdown of Apple’s annual carbon
footprint for 2019 [27]. It separates the company’s total
emissions—25 million metric tons of CO2—into manufacturing (red), product use (green), product transport (blue),
corporate facilities (grey), and product recycling. Manufacturing, which includes integrated circuits, boards and flexes,
displays, electronics, steel, and assembly, accounts for over
74% of all emissions. By comparison, emissions from product use—energy consumption from applications running on
hardware1 —account for only 19% of Apple’s overall output.
Among the salient hardware-manufacturing components are
integrated circuits, boards and flexes, aluminum, electronics,
steel, and assembly. Integrated circuits, comprising roughly
33% of Apple’s total carbon output, consist of CPUs, DRAMs,
SoCs, and NAND flash storage [27]. In fact, capex-related
carbon emissions from manufacturing integrated circuits alone
eclipse opex-related carbon emissions from device energy
consumption. Additional capacitors, resistors, transistors, and
diodes soldered to bare boards and flexes constitute “electronics”; battery cells, plastic, and glass constitute “other.” The role
of integrated circuits illustrates the potential impact computerarchitecture and circuit researchers can have on sustainablehardware design.
B. Personal-computing life-cycle analyses
Apple’s overall carbon footprint aggregates the emissions
from all of its mobile phones, tablets, wearable devices, and
desktops. Here we detail the carbon footprint of each type.
The analysis includes devices from Apple, Google, Huawei,
and Microsoft.
Takeaway 2: The breakdown of carbon footprint between
manufacturing and use varies by consumer device. Manufacturing dominates emissions for battery-powered devices,
whereas operational energy consumption dominates emissions
from always-connected devices.
Figure 6 (top) shows LCAs for different battery-powered
devices (e.g., tablets, phones, wearables, and laptops) and
always connected devices (e.g., personal assistants, desktops,
and game consoles). The analysis aggregates LCAs from Apple, Google, and Microsoft products released after 2017 [20],
[37]–[63]. For devices with multiple models, such as the
iPhone 11, iPhone XR, and iPhone SE, we show one standard
deviation of manufacturing and operational-use breakdowns.
For all devices, we aggregate each one’s emissions across its
lifetime, representing an average of three to four years for
mobile phones, wearables, tablets, and desktops [27], [29].
To reduce the carbon footprints of personal-computing
devices, hardware and software designers must consider the
carbon impact of both hardware manufacturing (capex) and
energy consumption (opex). For instance, Figure 6 (top)
shows that manufacturing (capex) accounts for roughly 75%
of the emissions for battery-powered devices. Energy consumed (opex) by these devices accounts for approximately
1 Apple reports GHG emissions from product use on the basis of the amount
of time device is in active operation and the geographically specific energygrid efficiency.
Gaming
Surfaces
Pixel
Device
iPads
Pixel Go
iPhones
Pixels
Apple Watches
MacBooks
HomePod
iMacs
Mac Pro
Xboxes
Tablets Phone Wearable Laptop Speakers Desktop
W/Display Desktop
Battery operated Always connected
Google Homes
Mac mini
Fig. 6. Breakdown of carbon emissions for various Apple, Google, and
Microsoft personal-computing platforms. As the top chart shows, hardware
manufacturing dominates the carbon output for battery-powered devices (e.g.,
phones, wearables, and tables); most emissions for always connected devices
(e.g., laptops, desktops, and game consoles) come from product use. The
bottom chart shows the absolute carbon output of battery-powered and always
connected devices. Overall, carbon footprint (total, manufacturing, and use)
is variable and scales with the platform.
20% of emissions. By comparison, most emissions for always connected devices are from their energy consumption.
Nonetheless, even for these devices, hardware manufacturing
accounts for 40% of carbon output from personal assistants
(e.g., Google Home) and 50% from desktops.
Takeaway 3: In addition to the carbon breakdown, the
total output for device and hardware manufacturing varies
by platform. The hardware-manufacturing footprint increases
with increasing hardware capability (e.g., flops, memory bandwidth, and storage).
Figure 6 (bottom) shows the absolute carbon emissions for
manufacturing ( ), operation (X), and the overall device total
( ). Results are based on the average footprint for each device
type.
Across devices, the amount of total, manufacturing-related,
and use-related emissions vary. For instance, always connected
devices typically involve more emissions than battery-powered
devices. To illustrate, the total and manufacturing footprint for
an Apple MacBook laptop is typically 3× that of an iPhone.
The varying total and manufacturing levels illustrate that the
capex-related output depends on the platform design and scale
rather than being a static overhead.
Takeaway 4: As energy efficiency improves and hardware
858
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.iPhone Apple Watch iPad
3GS
4
4S
5S
6S
7
XR
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3
Series 4
Series 5
Gen 2
Gen 3
Gen 5
Gen 6
Gen 7
X
Fig. 7. Carbon emissions and breakdown of emissions across generations for
Apple iPhones, Watches, and iPads. Across all devices (top), the fraction from
production and manufacturing increased from generation to generation. The
absolute carbon output ( ) for iPads decreased over time, while for iPhones
and Watches it increased (bottom). The rising carbon emissions are largely due
to a growing contribution from manufacturing. For iPhones, as carbon from
operational use (X) decreased, the manufacturing contribution ( ) increased.
capability increases from one device generation to another,
a rising percentage of hardware life-cycle carbon emissions
comes from manufacturing.
Figure 7 (top) shows the carbon breakdown over several
generations of battery-powered devices: iPhones (from 2008’s
3GS to 2018’s XR), Apple Watches (2016’s Series 1 to 2019’s
Series 5), and iPads (2012’s Gen 2 to 2019’s Gen 7). In
all three cases, the fraction of carbon emissions devoted to
hardware manufacturing increased over time. For iPhones,
manufacturing accounts for 40% of emissions in the 3GS and
75% in the XR; for Apple Watches, it accounts for 60% in
Series 1 and 75% in Series 5; and for iPads, 60% in Gen2 and
75% in Gen 7.
Figure 7 (bottom) shows the absolute carbon output across
generations for the same devices. As performance and energy
efficiency of both software and hardware have improved over
the past few years, the opex-related carbon output from energy
consumption (X) has decreased. Despite the energy-efficiency
increases over iPhone and Apple Watch generations, however,
total carbon emissions ( ) grew steadily. The increasing ouputs
owe to a rising contribution from manufacturing ( ) as hardware provides more flops, memory bandwidth, storage, application support, and sensors. The opposing energy-efficiency
and carbon-emission trends underscore the inequality of these
two factors. Reducing carbon output for the hardware life
cycle requires design for lower manufacturing emissions or
iPhone 7
iPhone XR
iPhone 11
iPhone 11 Pro
Pixel 3a
iPhone 6s
Honor 5C
Honor 8Lite
iPhone X
Pareto-2017
Pareto-2019
Fig. 8. Performance (MobileNet v1 inference throughput) versus carbon
footprint Pareto frontier by mobile-phone generation. (“A” represents Apple,
“G” Google, and “H” Huawei.) The Pareto frontier shifted primarily to the
right between 2017 (blue line) and 2019 (red line), highlighting the focus on
increasing system performance as opposed to decreasing carbon emissions.
engagement with hardware suppliers.
C. Performance and energy versus carbon footprint
In addition to the overall carbon emissions from manufacturing and operational energy consumption, we also consider
performance, energy, and carbon footprint tradeoffs for an
example workload: mobile AI inference.
Takeaway 5: From 2017 to 2019, software and hardware
optimizations primarily focused on maximizing performance,
overlooking the growth trend of carbon footprint.
Figure 8 illustrates the tradeoff between performance, measured as MobileNet v1 throughput (i.e., inference images per
second) [64], [65], and the manufacturing carbon footprint.
The analysis categorizes devices by their release year (color)
and vendor (“G” for Google, “H” for Huawei, and “A” for
Apple) [20], [21], [37], [40], [54], [56], [57], [59], [66].
Finally, we highlight two performance/carbon footprint Pareto
frontiers for devices made in 2017 and earlier (blue) and for
devices made in 2019 and earlier (red).
The Pareto frontiers illustrate a tradeoff between AI
performance and carbon footprint. Across the 2019
performance/carbon-footprint frontier, the iPhone 11 Pro
achieves a MobileNet v1 throughput of 75 images per second
at a manufacturing output of 66 kg of CO2; in comparison,
the Pixel 3a achieves an inference throughput of 20 images
per second with 45 kg of CO2. In addition to this tradeoff,
the Pareto frontier between 2017 and 2019 shifts to the right,
prioritizing higher performance through more-sophisticated
SoCs and specialized hardware. In fact, although the iPhone
X (2017) achieved a throughput of 35 images per second at
63 kg of CO2, the iPhone 11 (2019) doubled that performance
at a slightly lower 60 kg of CO2. While greater performance
is important to enabling new applications and improving the
user experience, moving the Pareto frontier down is also
important—that is, to mitigate the environmental impact of
emerging platforms and applications, it is crucial to design
workloads and systems with similar performance but lower
environmental impact.
Takeaway 6: Given the energy-efficiency improvements
from software and hardware innovation over the last decade,
859
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.ResNet50 Inception v3 MobileNet v2 MobileNet v3
CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP
17x speedup
algorithm
3.2x speedup
HW
36x speedup
algorithm
2x speedup
HW
Fig. 9. Evaluating the improvement of inference throughput (top) and energy
efficiency (bottom) for different convolutional-neural-network and hardware
generations. Algorithmic and hardware advances have considerably increased
the performance and operational energy consumption.
amortizing the manufacturing carbon output requires continuously operating mobile devices for three years—beyond their
typical lifetime.
Figure 9 illustrates the inference latency (top) and energy
(bottom) of several well-known convolutional neural networks.
Results are for a unit batch size and 224×224 images on
a Google Pixel 3 phone with a Qualcomm Snapdragon 845
SoC [67]. We measured energy consumption on a Monsoon
power monitor [68], [69]. As expected, algorithmic and hardware innovation has improved both performance and energy
efficiency. For instance, when running on a CPU, MobileNet
v2 is 17× faster than Inception v3 [70]. Moreover, it is
an additional 3× faster when running on a DSP than on
a CPU. Similarly, algorithmic and hardware innovation has
increased energy efficiency by 36× and 2×, respectively. The
performance and energy optimizations have also affected AI
carbon footprint on mobile devices.
Carbon emissions from hardware manufacturing can be
amortized by lengthening the hardware’s operating time. Here,
we define the starting point of this amortization when the
carbon output from operational use equals that from hardware
manufacturing (i.e., the ratio of opex emissions to capex
emissions is 1). Figure 10 shows this breakeven in terms of
the number of inferences (top) and days of operation (bottom)
on a Google Pixel 3 phone. We converted our measured power
consumption (using a Monsoon power monitor [68]) to operational carbon emissions by assuming the average US energygrid output: 380 g of CO2 per kilowatt-hour [14]. Finally,
the manufacturing carbon footprint considers the overhead of
building the SoC alone—assuming half the production carbon
emissions are due to integrated circuits (see Figure 5).
Algorithmic and architectural innovation has boosted energy
efficiency, lengthening the amortization time. For instance,
Figure 10 (top) shows that to bring the carbon output from
energy consumption (opex) to parity with that from hardware
manufacturing (capex), ResNet-50 requires 200 million images
and Inception v3 requires 150 million images when running
ResNet50 Inception v3 MobileNet v2 MobileNet v3
CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP CPU GPU DSP
1 year
~3 years
of operation
Fig. 10. Evaluating carbon footprint between manufacturing- and operationalrelated activities for Google Pixel 3 smartphone. Algorithmic AI and hardware advances dramatically shifted carbon emissions toward manufacturing
overhead. The top chart shows the number of inference images necessary for
operational output to equal the integrated-circuit-manufacturing output. The
bottom chart shows how many days of image processing is necessary for
operational output to equal integrated-circuit-manufacturing output.
on a CPU [71], [72]. MobileNet v3 on a CPU takes five
billion [70] images; the 25× increase owes to algorithmic
advances reducing mobile AI’s memory and compute requirements. In addition, hardware enhancements also reduce
operational emissions. For example, running MobileNet v3 on
a DSP rather than a CPU reduces the operational footprint
by 2×, requiring 10 billion images for operational- and
hardware-manufacturing-related carbon emissions to balance.
In comparison, the ImageNet training set consists of 14 million
images [67].
Furthermore, Figure 10 illustrates how many days of continual AI inference are necessary for the operational carbon
footprint to equal the hardware-manufacturing footprint. MobileNet v3 running on a CPU, for example, takes 350 days
of continuous operation. DSPs increase the duration to nearly
1,200 days due to 1.5× and 2.2× improvements in performance and power efficiency, respectively. By comparison, the
device’s expected lifetime is three years (about 1,100 days).
Generally, given algorithmic and architectural enhancements,
amortizing carbon emissions from hardware manufacturing
requires performing AI inference beyond the expected lifetime
of most mobile devices.
IV. E NVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF DATA CENTERS
As AI, autonomous driving, robotics, scientific computing,
AR/VR, and other emerging applications become ubiquitous,
considering the environmental implications of both edge and
data-center systems becomes important. In this section we
explore the environmental impact of data centers. First we
consider the carbon-emission breakdown of Facebook and
Google facilities using industry-reported GHG Protocol data.
Next, we discuss the historical trends of data-center carbon
emissions. Our discussion highlights the positive impact of
renewable energy on these emissions and the need for more-
860
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Year
Google’s carbon footprint
Facebook’s carbon footprint
Scope 2 Location
Scope 2 Location
Scope 3
Scope 3
Scope 2
Market
Scope 2 Market
Scope 1
Scope 1
Change in HW footprint
disclosure practice
Impact of buying
renewable energy
Impact of buying
renewable energy
Change in HW footprint
disclosure practice
Fig. 11. Carbon footprint of Facebook and Google (two large data center
operators). As data centers increasingly rely on renewable energy, carbon
emissions originate more from Scope 3, or supply-chain emissions (e.g.,
hardware manufacturing and construction).
detailed accounting and reporting. Finally, we present a case
study of renewable energy’s effect on data-center footprint.
A. Breakdown of warehouse-scale data centers
Takeaway 7: For data-center operators and cloud
providers, most emissions are capex-related—for example,
construction, infrastructure, and hardware manufacturing.
Figure 11 illustrates the carbon footprint of Google (2013
to 2018) and Facebook (2014 to 2019) [16], [29]. Following
the GHG Protocol, we split emissions into Scope 1 (blue),
Scope 2 (green), and Scope 3 (red). Recall that Scope 1 (opex)
emissions come from facility use of refrigerants, natural gas,
and diesel; Scope 2 (opex) emissions come from purchased
electricity; and Scope 3 (capex) emissions come from the
supply chain, including employee travel, construction, and
hardware manufacturing (see Section II for details).
Analyzing the most recent data, Scope 3 comprises the
majority of emissions for both Google and Facebook. In 2018,
Google reported 21× higher Scope 3 emissions than Scope
2 emissions—that is, 14,000,000 metric tons of CO2versus
684,000. In 2019, Facebook reported 23× higher Scope 3
emissions than Scope 2 emissions—that is, 5,800,000 metric
tons of CO2versus 252,000.
Recall that Scope 3 emissions aggregate the entire supply
chain; a large fraction of them are from data-center capex
overhead such as construction and hardware manufacturing.
Figure 12 illustrates Facebook’s breakdown of Scope 3 emissions in 2019. Here, construction and hardware manufacturing
(capital goods) account for up to 49% of the company’s Scope
3 emissions.
Similarly, we anticipate most of Google’s Scope 3 emissions
are from construction and hardware manufacturing. Figure 11
shows that between 2017 and 2018, the company reported a
5× increase in that output. We attribute the large increase
Capital goods (42%)
Purchased goods
(38%)
Hardware
Infrastructure Travel (8%)
Other (1%)
Commute (2%)
Fuel (2%)
Construction (7%)
Fig. 12. Breakdown of Facebook’s 2019 Scope 3 carbon emissions. Capital
goods (e.g., hardware, infrastructure) and construction account for up to 49%
of the annual total [16]
to the additional accounting and disclosure of hardwaremanufacturing emissions—during that time, data-center energy consumption only increased by 30% [29]. Given the additional disclosure, the proportion of capex-related emissions
increases compared with opex-related emissions. Note that
because industry disclosure practices are evolving, publicly
reported Scope 3 carbon output should be interpreted as a
lower bound. The varying guidelines highlight the importance
of better carbon accounting and reporting.
B. Impact of renewable energy
To decrease operational carbon emissions, data centers are
increasingly employing renewable energy. Here we detail the
impact of renewable energy on overall emissions and the
breakdown between opex- and capex-related factors.
Takeaway 8: Although overall data-center energy consumption has risen over the past five years, carbon emissions
from operational energy consumption have fallen. The primary
factor contributing to the growing gap between data-center
energy consumption and carbon output is the use of renewable
energy.
Figure 11 illustrates the carbon footprint of Google and
Facebook over six years. Although the figure divides these
emissions into Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3, Scope
2 comprises two types: location based and market based.
Location-based emissions assume the local electricity grid
produces the energy—often through a mix of brown (i.e.,
coal and gas) and green sources. Market-based emissions
reflect energy that companies have purposefully chosen or
contracted—typically solar, hydroelectric, wind, and other
renewable sources. Around 2013, Facebook and Google began procuring renewable energy to reduce operational carbon
emissions. These purchases decreased their operational carbon
output even though their energy consumption continued to
increase. Thus, minimizing the emissions related to data-center
workloads and hardware must consider renewable energy and
the tradeoffs between opex- and capex-related factors.
Takeaway 9: For hardware, the carbon footprint between
hardware manufacturing and use depends on the energy
source. Powering hardware with renewable energy reduces
emissions from operational energy consumption; consequently,
861
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Source Carbon intensity Energy-payback
(g CO2/kWh) time (months)
Coal 820 2 [33]
Gas 490 1 [33]
Biomass 230 ∼12 [73]
Solar 41 ∼36 [34]
Geothermal 38 72 [74]
Hydropower 24 ∼12–36 [33], [75]
Nuclear 12 2 [33]
Wind 11 ≤12 [35]
TABLE II
C ARBON EFFICIENCY OF VARIOUS RENEWABLE - ENERGY SOURCES .
Geographic Carbon intensity Dominant
average (g CO2 / kWh) energy source
World 301 –
India 725 Coal/gas
Australia 597 Coal
Taiwan 583 Coal/gas
Singapore 495 Gas
United States 380 Coal/gas
Europe 295 –
Brazil 82 Wind/hydropower
Iceland 28 Hydropower
TABLE III
G LOBAL CARBON EFFICIENCY OF ENERGY PRODUCTION [14], [76], [77].
hardware manufacturing begins to dominate the carbon footprint.
Figure 13 illustrates the impact of renewable energy on
opex- and capex-related emissions on the basis of reported
carbon data from Intel (top) and AMD (bottom) [26], [28]. The
format mimics hardware life cycles. Carbon emissions from
device use over a three-year lifetime appear in green; emission
from hardware manufacturing appear in red. Although Intel
and AMD both assume the average US energy-grid mix, we
scaled the hardware-use emissions in accordance with variable
energy sources. Recall that warehouse-scale data centers often
employ solar, hydropower, wind, and other renewable-energy
sources.
The use of renewable energy dramatically changes the
breakdown of carbon emissions across the hardware life cycle.
For the baseline, assuming the US energy grid, roughly 60%
of Intel’s carbon emissions and 45% of AMD’s come from
hardware use and energy consumption. With renewable energy,
however, emissions from operational consumption decrease.
This decline is because renewable energy is orders of magnitude more efficient in grams of CO2 emitted per kilowatthour of energy generated, as Table II shows. Table III lists the
carbon intensity of energy production globally. The baseline
case assumes the US energy grid (301 g CO2 per kilowatthour); solar and wind emit 41 g and 11 g of CO2 per kilowatthour, respectively. Figure 13 shows that when using solar
and wind, which frequently power data centers, over 80% of
emissions come from hardware manufacturing.
Designing sustainable data centers should therefore consider
the role of renewable energy, the effect of efficiency increases
on opex-related emissions, and the effect of resource provisioning and leaner hardware on capex-related emissions.
World Avg.
Coal
Gas
America Avg
Bio Mass
Solar
Geothermal
Hydropower
Nuclear
Wind
Travel
HW Use
HW Transport
Direct Emission
Indirect Emission
Renewable energy
Raw materials
Other
Increasingly “green” energy sources Breakdown from Intel
Breakdown from AMD
Indirect Emission
Raw materials &
manufacturing
Travel
HW Transport
HW Use
Increasingly “green” energy sources
Fig. 13. Reported carbon-footprint breakdown for Intel (top) and AMD
(bottom) as renewable energy increasingly (from left to right) powers hardware
operation. The use of renewable energy reduces carbon emissions dramatically; most of the remaining emissions are from manufacturing.
V. E NVIRONMENTAL IMPACT FROM MANUFACTURING
So far, our results show hardware manufacturing comprises
a large portion of emissions in both mobile and data-center
systems. In data centers, renewable energy is a significant
contributor to the opex-related footprint. In this section, we
consider the carbon footprint of chip manufacturing and the
impact of powering fabs using renewable energy.
Takeaway 10: Using renewable energy to power fabs will
reduce the carbon emissions from hardware manufacturing.
Even under optimistic renewable-energy projections, however,
manufacturing will continue to represent a large portion of
hardware-life-cycle carbon footprints.
Figure 14 shows the carbon breakdown for wafer manufacturing at TSMC [31]. The breakdown is normalized to the
baseline energy source. To model the impact of renewable
energy, we vary the carbon intensity of the energy consumed.
Although the precise energy-grid efficiency is unknown, our
analysis considers a range of improvements, including the
best case: replacing coal with 100% wind energy, for a 70×
improvement (see Table II). Using greener energy directly
reduces the fab’s carbon output from consumed energy (green).
Even though using renewable energy can cut a fab’s
hardware-manufacturing carbon emissions, minimizing lifecycle and hardware-manufacturing emissions will remain important. As Figure 14 shows, a 64× boost in renewable energy
reduces the overall carbon output by roughly 2.7×, an ambitious goal. By 2025, TSMC estimates renewable energy will
produce 20% of the electricity that drives forthcoming 3nm
fabs [31]. Intel already uses renewable energy to meet much
of its demand; only 9.7% of the energy consumed by Intel
fabs comes from nonrenewable sources (see Figure 13). Recall
862
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.1x 2x 4x 8x 16x 32x 64x
Chemicals & gases
PFC & diffusive
emissions
Wafers
Bulk gas
Other
Energy
Breakdown of TSMC wafer carbon footprint
Fig. 14. Carbon-emissions breakdown for TSMC wafer manufacturing. Renewable energy provides up to a 64× reduction in emissions from electricity,
and overall emissions for wafers drops by 2.7×. Although the reduction will
reduce the carbon output of manufacturing, consideration of capex-related
emissions for mobile and data-center hardware will remain important.
that roughly 75% of the carbon footprint for battery-powered
devices is from hardware manufacturing (see Section III), and
opex is a small fraction for data centers. Even as fabs employ
more renewable energy to reduce their environmental impact,
hardware manufacturing will remain an important aspect of
designing sustainable computers and workloads.
VI. A DDRESSING CARBON FOOTPRINT OF SYSTEMS
Optimizing the environmental impact of mobile and datacenter computing platforms requires addressing the carbon
footprint from operational energy consumption (opex) and
hardware manufacturing (capex). Given its immediate importance and scale, we must adopt vertically integrated research
methods to minimize the emissions associated with computing.
Figure 15 illustrates some of the important research directions
and their corresponding layers in the computing stack. This
section outlines future directions across the computing stack in
light of the state-of-the-art and prior work. We use AI training
and inference as an example application, but the tradeoffs
extend to other domains.
Applications and algorithms. Application- and algorithmlevel optimizations can reduce both opex- and capex-related
carbon emissions. As a motivating example, consider AI
training. The parameters of the energy footprint for training
AI models are threefold: the footprint of processing one
example (E), the data-set size (D), and the hyperparameter
search (H) [15], [78]. Even though some data centers employ
renewable energy (see Section IV), researchers must still
consider the hardware’s carbon footprint.
Table IV presents the compute, memory, and carbon footprint characteristics for two Apple Mac Pro desktops. Compared with the first configuration, the second has dual AMD
Radeon Vega GPUs, providing 4×, 8×, and 16× more flops,
memory bandwidth, and capacity, respectively. It represents
a data-center-scale server [79], [80], yielding a 2.6× greater
manufacturing carbon footprint.
Reducing carbon emissions requires training on systems
with fewer resources. Given the faster–than–Moore’s Law
AI improvement, novel methods to train models given lesser
compute and storage capabilities can directly reduce associated carbon emissions (i.e., E, D). Similarly, reducing
Parameter Mac Pro 1 Mac Pro 2
CPU (cores × threads) 8×2 28×2
DRAM (GB) 32 1,536
Storage (GB) 256 4,096
GPU performance (teraflops) 6.2 28.4
GPU-memory BW (GB/s) 256 2,048
System TDP (W) 310 730
Manufacturing CO2 (kg) 700 1,900
TABLE IV
C OMPARING A PPLE M AC P RO DESKTOPS . T HE HIGH - PERFORMANCE
CONFIGURATION — MORE CORES , MEMORY, STORAGE , GPU FLOPS , AND
GPU MEMORY BANDWIDTH — HAS A 2.7× HIGHER
MANUFACTURING - RELATED CO2 [82].
the hyperparameter-search factor (H) reduces the necessary
number of parallel training nodes and the AI-training carbon
footprint [78], [81]. Generally, algorithmic optimizations for
scale-down systems will drastically cut emissions.
Run-time systems. Run-time systems, including schedulers,
load-balancing services, and operating systems, can reduce
both opex- and capex-related carbon footprints. Optimizing
for opex-related emissions, cloud providers use machine learning to improve the efficiency of data-center cooling infrastructure [83]. Furthermore, recent work proposes scheduling
batch-processing workloads during periods when renewable
energy is readily available [84]–[88]. Doing so decreases the
average carbon intensity (see Table II) of energy consumed by
data-center services.
Optimizing for capex-related emissions requires reducing
hardware resources. Recently proposed schedulers optimize
infrastructure efficiency in terms of total power consumption
while balancing performance for latency-critical and batchprocessing workloads [79], [80], [89]–[91]. Others have proposed novel scheduler designs to enable energy-efficient, collaborative cloud and edge execution [69], [92]. Our analysis enables future studies to co-optimize for tail-latency-,
throughput-, power-, and infrastructure-related carbon emissions.
Systems. Systems researchers can guide overall mobile- and
data-center-scale system provisioning to directly reduce capexrelated emissions. Recently, systems have scaled up and out to
boost performance and power efficiency [93], [94]. Figure 8
and Figure 9 show more-sophisticated hardware for improving
mobile-AI performance and power efficiency; simultaneously,
scale-up hardware increases manufacturing- and device-level
carbon emissions. Instead, as Table IV shows, scaling systems
down can reduce the environmental impact of hardware—
assuming they still provide sufficient performance.
Data centers often comprise heterogeneous platforms, with
custom hardware for important applications, to maximize
infrastructure efficiency (e.g., performance and power). For instance, Facebook data centers have custom servers for AI inference and training [95]. Our work enables systems researchers
to consider how heterogeneity can reduce carbon footprint
by reducing overall hardware resources in the data center.
But researchers must balance the environmental benefits with
the challenges of heterogeneity: programmability, resource
management, cross-ISA execution, and debugging [96].
863
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Application/Algorithms
Runtime systems
Systems
Compilers
Architecture
Circuits
Scale down hardware
Reliability (longer lifetime)
Operational energy minimization
Carbon-aware load balancing
Specialized hardware
Datacenter heterogeneity
Lower footprint circuit design
Scheduling workloads
Devices & Manufacturing
Fig. 15. Reducing the carbon output of computer systems requires cross-layer
optimization across the computing stack. The potential opportunities (right)
overlap with multiple stack layers (left).
Compilers and programming languages. Recent work
has proposed new programming languages to enable moreenergy-efficient code [97]. Others propose compiler-level optimizations to increase the code’s energy efficiency [98]–[100].
Although optimizing nonfunctional properties, such as minimizing energy consumption through instruction-level energy
annotation [101]–[103], can indirectly mitigate environmental
impact, future compiler and programming-language technologies can optimize for CO2 emissions directly by applying our
emission analysis.
Architecture. Over the past 20 years, computer-architecture
researchers and designers have devoted substantial effort to
energy-efficient mobile and data-center systems. Their work
includes system-performance increases, power management
and energy-efficiency optimization through dynamic voltage
and frequency scaling (DVFS) [99], [100], [104]–[114], and
specialized hardware [4]–[9]. As Figure 9 and Figure 10
show, architectural improvements have considerably reduced
the operational carbon footprint of mobile AI inference.
Future architecture research can also minimize capex-related
carbon emissions. For instance, as Table IV shows, higherperformance hardware incurs higher manufacturing-related
carbon emissions. More generally, as billion-transistor devices
experience low utilization, systems must balance dark silicon
with manufacturing emissions [24]. Similarly, architectural
optimizations can directly reduce CO2 output by judiciously
provisioning resources, scaling down hardware, and incorporating specialized circuits.
Circuits. In addition to architectural innovations, circuit
designers have enabled high-performance and low-power hardware through efforts that include clock/power gating [115],
DVFS [116], and circuit-level timing speculation [117]. These
efforts indirectly minimize opex-related carbon emissions.
Future circuit research can also reduce capex-related carbon
emissions. First, it may consider circuit-level resource provisioning to balance performance, area, energy efficiency, and
carbon footprint. Next, DRAM and NAND-flash-memory research should investigate low-carbon technologies and higher
reliability to lengthen hardware lifetimes. Finally, vertically
integrated research into specializing low-carbon circuits for
salient applications will also decrease capex-related emissions.
For example, in the case of AI, co-designing neural-network
fault tolerance and compression for specialized circuits and
memories can allow hardware consolidation and, therefore,
smaller carbon footprints [4], [5], [7], [118], [119].
Semiconductor devices and manufacturing. Finally,
capex emissions must be addressed through device modeling,
characterization, design, and fab manufacturing. For instance,
hardening a device’s reliability and endurance extends its
lifetime, cutting capex-related carbon emissions. Moreover,
research into sustainable manufacturing processes via novel
devices, yield enhancement, fabrication materials, renewableenergy sources, and maximum operating efficiency will directly reduce production overhead.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
As computing technology becomes ubiquitous, so does its
environmental impact. This work shows how developers and
researchers should approach the environmental consequences
of computing, from mobile to data-center-scale systems. First,
we demonstrated that reducing energy consumption alone
fails to reduce carbon emissions. Next, we described the
industry’s practice for quantifying the carbon output of organizations and individual systems. Finally, on the basis of
our analysis, we characterized the carbon emissions of various
hardware platforms. Our effort demonstrates that over the last
decade, hardware manufacturing—as opposed to operational
energy consumption—has increasingly dominated the carbon
footprint of mobile systems. Similarly, as more data centers
employ renewable energy, the dominant source of their total
carbon footprint becomes hardware manufacturing.
We hope this work lays the foundation for future investigation of environmentally sustainable systems. Designing,
building, and deploying such systems requires collective industry/academic collaboration. We conclude by outlining future
steps toward that goal.
Better accounting practices. Although many organizations
publicly report their carbon emissions, improved accounting
(e.g., broader participation as well as standardized accounting
and disclosures) will provide further guidance on tackling
salient challenges in realizing environmentally sustainable
systems.
Carbon footprint as a first-order optimization target.
Researchers and developers across the computing stack should
consider carbon footprint to be a first-class design metric
alongside increased workload and system characterization, and
they should incorporate optimizations for lower environmental
impact.
Beyond carbon emissions. Although this work focuses
on carbon emissions, the environmental impact of computing
systems is multifaceted, spanning water consumption as well
as use of other natural resources, including aluminum, cobalt,
copper, glass, gold, tin, lithium, zinc, and plastic.
864
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.VIII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Urvi Parekh, Stephanie Savage, and
Julia Rogers for their valuable insights and many discussions
on the environmental sustainability of technology companies.
The collaboration leads to the deeper understanding of the
challenges technology companies face in enabling environmentally sustainable operation presented in this work. We
would also like to thank Kim Hazelwood for supporting and
encouraging this work. The support helped foster new interdisciplinary collaborations on understanding and tackling the
environmental impact of computing. Additionally, we would
like to thank Srilatha Manne for the insightful discussions
and valuable context for sustainable computing efforts across
industry. Finally we would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their detailed feedback on this work.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. S. Andrae and T. Edler, “On global electricity usage of communication technology: trends to 2030,” Challenges, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 117–157,
2015.
[2] N. Jones, “How to stop data centres from gobbling up the world’s
electricity,” Nature, vol. 561, no. 7722, pp. 163–167, 2018.
[3] P. J. Denning and T. G. Lewis, “Exponential laws of computing
growth,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 60, p. 54–65, Dec. 2016.
[4] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, M. A. Horowitz, and W. J.
Dally, “EIE: Efficient inference engine on compressed deep neural
network,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 243–254, IEEE,
2016.
[5] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: An energyefficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits (JSSC), vol. 52, no. 1,
pp. 127–138, 2017.
[6] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa,
S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, et al., “In-datacenter
performance analysis of a tensor processing unit,” in Proceedings of
the ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2017.
[7] B. Reagen, P. Whatmough, R. Adolf, S. Rama, H. Lee, S. K. Lee,
J. M. Hernández-Lobato, G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “Minerva: Enabling low-power, highly-accurate deep neural network accelerators,”
in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 267–278, IEEE, 2016.
[8] S. Zhang, Z. Du, L. Zhang, H. Lan, S. Liu, L. Li, Q. Guo, T. Chen, and
Y. Chen, “Cambricon-x: An accelerator for sparse neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pp. 1–12, Oct 2016.
[9] S. Zhang, Z. Du, L. Zhang, H. Lan, S. Liu, L. Li, Q. Guo, T. Chen, and
Y. Chen, “Cambricon-x: An accelerator for sparse neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture, p. 20, IEEE Press, 2016.
[10] D. E. Shaw, M. M. Deneroff, R. O. Dror, J. S. Kuskin, R. H. Larson,
J. K. Salmon, C. Young, B. Batson, K. J. Bowers, J. C. Chao, et al.,
“Anton, a special-purpose machine for molecular dynamics simulation,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 91–97, 2008.
[11] R. Hameed, W. Qadeer, M. Wachs, O. Azizi, A. Solomatnikov, B. C.
Lee, S. Richardson, C. Kozyrakis, and M. Horowitz, “Understanding
sources of inefficiency in general-purpose chips,” in Proceedings of
the 37th annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA), pp. 37–47, 2010.
[12] A. M. Caulfield, E. S. Chung, A. Putnam, H. Angepat, J. Fowers,
M. Haselman, S. Heil, M. Humphrey, P. Kaur, J.-Y. Kim, et al., “A
cloud-scale acceleration architecture,” in 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pp. 1–13,
IEEE, 2016.
[13] L. A. Barroso and U. Hölzle, “The datacenter as a computer: An
introduction to the design of warehouse-scale machines,” Synthesis
lectures on computer architecture, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–108, 2009.
[14] P. Henderson, J. Hu, J. Romoff, E. Brunskill, D. Jurafsky, and J. Pineau,
“Towards the systematic reporting of the energy and carbon footprints
of machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05651, 2020.
[15] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in nlp,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02243,
2019.
[16] Facebook, “Facebook sustainability data 2019,” 2020.
[17] A. A. Chien, R. Wolski, and F. Yang, “The zero-carbon cloud: Highvalue, dispatchable demand for renewable power generators,” The
Electricity Journal, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 110–118, 2015.
[18] F. Yang and A. A. Chien, “Zccloud: Exploring wasted green power
for high-performance computing,” in 2016 IEEE International Parallel
and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), pp. 1051–1060, 2016.
[19] F. Yang and A. A. Chien, “Large-scale and extreme-scale computing
with stranded green power: Opportunities and costs,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1103–
1116, 2018.
[20] Apple, “Product environmental report iphone 11,” 2019.
[21] Apple, “iphone 3gs environmental report,” 2009.
[22] J. Park, M. Naumov, P. Basu, S. Deng, A. Kalaiah, D. Khudia, J. Law,
P. Malani, A. Malevich, S. Nadathur, et al., “Deep learning inference
in facebook data centers: Characterization, performance optimizations
and hardware implications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09886, 2018.
[23] M. Naumov, J. Kim, D. Mudigere, S. Sridharan, X. Wang, W. Zhao,
S. Yilmaz, C. Kim, H. Yuen, M. Ozdal, et al., “Deep learning training
in facebook data centers: Design of scale-up and scale-out systems,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09518, 2020.
[24] H. Esmaeilzadeh, E. Blem, R. S. Amant, K. Sankaralingam, and
D. Burger, “Dark silicon and the end of multicore scaling,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 122–134, 2012.
[25] G. Foundries, “Global foundries corporate responsibility report,” 2019.
[26] Intel, “Corporate responsibility at intel,” 2020.
[27] Apple, “Apple environmental responsibility report,” 2019.
[28] A. M. Devices, “Advanced micro devices (“amd”) corporate responsibility,” 2020.
[29] Google, “Google environmental report 2019,” 2020.
[30] G. G. PROTOCOL, “The greenhouse gas protocol: A corporate accounting and reporting standard.”
[31] TSMC, “Tsmc corporate social responsibility report,” 2018.
[32] J. Lee, “Tsmc’s 3nm fab passed the environmental impact assessment,”
2018.
[33] D. Weißbach, G. Ruprecht, A. Huke, K. Czerski, S. Gottlieb, and
A. Hussein, “Energy intensities, erois (energy returned on invested),
and energy payback times of electricity generating power plants,”
Energy, vol. 52, pp. 210–221, 2013.
[34] T. U. N. R. E. Laboratory, “Photovoltalics faqs,” 2004.
[35] A. Bonou, A. Laurent, and S. I. Olsen, “Life cycle assessment of
onshore and offshore wind energy-from theory to application,” Applied
Energy, vol. 180, pp. 327–337, 2016.
[36] R. U. Ayres, “Life cycle analysis: A critique,” Resources, conservation
and recycling, vol. 14, no. 3-4, pp. 199–223, 1995.
[37] Apple, “Product environmental report iphone 11 pro,” 2019.
[38] Apple, “Product environmental report iphone 11 pro max,” 2019.
[39] Apple, “Product environmental report iphone se,” 2020.
[40] Apple, “iphone xr environmental report,” 2018.
[41] Apple, “Product environmental report ipad air,” 2019.
[42] Apple, “Product environmental report ipad,” 2019.
[43] Apple, “Product environmental report ipad mini,” 2019.
[44] Apple, “Product environmental report ipad pro (11 inch),” 2020.
[45] Apple, “Product environmental report ipad pro (12.9 inch),” 2020.
[46] Apple, “Apple watch series 3 (gps+cellular) environmental report,”
2017.
[47] Apple, “Apple watch series 3 (gps) environmental report,” 2017.
[48] Apple, “Apple watch series 5 environmental report,” 2019.
[49] Apple, “Product environmental report 13-inch macbook air with retina
display,” 2020.
[50] Apple, “Product environmental report 13-inch macbook pro,” 2020.
[51] Apple, “Product environmental report 16-inch macbook pro,” 2019.
[52] Apple, “Product environmental report mac mini,” 2018.
[53] Apple, “Product environmental report mac pro,” 2019.
[54] Google, “Google pixel 2 product environmental report,” 2017.
[55] Google, “Google pixel 2xl product environmental report,” 2017.
[56] Google, “Google pixel 3a product environmental report,” 2019.
[57] Google, “Google pixel 3 xl product environmental report,” 2018.
865
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.[58] Google, “Google pixel 3a xl product environmental report,” 2019.
[59] Google, “Google pixel 3 product environmental report,” 2018.
[60] Google, “Google home product environmental report,” 2016.
[61] Google, “Google home hub product environmental report,” 2018.
[62] Google, “Google home mini product environmental report,” 2017.
[63] Google, “Google pixelbook go product environmental report,” 2019.
[64] Geekbench, “Geekbench 5,” 2019.
[65] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang,
T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, “Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
[66] Huawei, “Product environmental information,” 2020.
[67] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma,
Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, et al., “Imagenet large
scale visual recognition challenge,” International Journal of Computer
Vision (IJCV), vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.
[68] M. S. Inc., “High voltage power monitor,” 2020.
[69] Y. G. Kim and C.-J. Wu, “Autoscale: Optimizing energy efficiency of
end-to-end edge inference under stochastic variance,” 2020.
[70] A. Howard, M. Sandler, G. Chu, L.-C. Chen, B. Chen, M. Tan,
W. Wang, Y. Zhu, R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, et al., “Searching for
mobilenetv3,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1314–1324, 2019.
[71] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
[72] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov,
D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with
convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), pp. 1–9, 2015.
[73] K. Madsen and N. S. Bentsen, “Carbon debt payback time for a biomass
fired chp plant—a case study from northern europe,” Energies, vol. 11,
no. 4, p. 807, 2018.
[74] K. Li, H. Bian, C. Liu, D. Zhang, and Y. Yang, “Comparison of
geothermal with solar and wind power generation systems,” Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 42, pp. 1464–1474, 2015.
[75] Varun, R. Prakash, and I. K. Bhat, “Life cycle energy and ghg analysis
of hydroelectric power development in india,” International Journal of
Green Energy, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 361–375, 2010.
[76] “electricitymap,” 2020.
[77] S. Bhawan and R. Puram, “Co2 baseline database for the indian power
sector,” 2018.
[78] R. Schwartz, J. Dodge, N. A. Smith, and O. Etzioni, “Green ai,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.10597, 2019.
[79] U. Gupta, C.-J. Wu, X. Wang, M. Naumov, B. Reagen, D. Brooks,
B. Cottel, K. Hazelwood, M. Hempstead, B. Jia, et al., “The architectural implications of facebook’s dnn-based personalized recommendation,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 488–501, IEEE, 2020.
[80] U. Gupta, S. Hsia, V. Saraph, X. Wang, B. Reagen, G.-Y. Wei, H.-H. S.
Lee, D. Brooks, and C.-J. Wu, “Deeprecsys: A system for optimizing
end-to-end at-scale neural recommendation inference,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.02772, 2020.
[81] D. Hernandez and T. B. Brown, “Measuring the algorithmic efficiency
of neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04305, 2020.
[82] Apple, “Product environmental report: Mac pro,” 2019.
[83] “DeepMind AI reduces google data centre cooling bill by 40%,” 2020.
[84] A. Radovanovic, “Our data centers now work harder when the sun
shines and wind blows,” 2020.
[85] K. Le, R. Bianchini, T. D. Nguyen, O. Bilgir, and M. Martonosi,
“Capping the brown energy consumption of internet services at low
cost,” in International Conference on Green Computing, pp. 3–14,
IEEE, 2010.
[86] Z. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Bash, A. Wierman, D. Gmach, Z. Wang,
M. Marwah, and C. Hyser, “Renewable and cooling aware workload
management for sustainable data centers,” in Proceedings of the 12th
ACM SIGMETRICS/PERFORMANCE Joint International Conference
on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, SIGMETRICS
’12, (New York, NY, USA), p. 175–186, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2012.
[87] C. Li, A. Qouneh, and T. Li, “Characterizing and analyzing renewable
energy driven data centers,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMETRICS
joint international conference on Measurement and modeling of computer systems, pp. 131–132, 2011.
[88] A. Gujarati, S. Elnikety, Y. He, K. S. McKinley, and B. B. Brandenburg,
“Swayam: distributed autoscaling to meet slas of machine learning
inference services with resource efficiency,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM/IFIP/USENIX Middleware Conference, pp. 109–120, 2017.
[89] S. Kanev, K. Hazelwood, G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “Tradeoffs
between power management and tail latency in warehouse-scale applications,” in 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC), pp. 31–40, IEEE, 2014.
[90] Q. Wu, Q. Deng, L. Ganesh, C.-H. Hsu, Y. Jin, S. Kumar, B. Li,
J. Meza, and Y. J. Song, “Dynamo: facebook’s data center-wide power
management system,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News,
vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 469–480, 2016.
[91] A. Sriraman, A. Dhanotia, and T. F. Wenisch, “Softsku: optimizing
server architectures for microservice diversity@ scale,” in Proceedings
of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA),
pp. 513–526, 2019.
[92] Y. Kang, J. Hauswald, C. Gao, A. Rovinski, T. Mudge, J. Mars,
and L. Tang, “Neurosurgeon: Collaborative intelligence between the
cloud and mobile edge,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News,
vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 615–629, 2017.
[93] I. Magaki, M. Khazraee, L. V. Gutierrez, and M. B. Taylor, “Asic
clouds: Specializing the datacenter,” in 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 178–
190, IEEE, 2016.
[94] B. Grot, D. Hardy, P. Lotfi-Kamran, B. Falsafi, C. Nicopoulos, and
Y. Sazeides, “Optimizing data-center tco with scale-out processors,”
IEEE Micro, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 52–63, 2012.
[95] K. Hazelwood, S. Bird, D. Brooks, S. Chintala, U. Diril, D. Dzhulgakov, M. Fawzy, B. Jia, Y. Jia, A. Kalro, et al., “Applied machine
learning at facebook: A datacenter infrastructure perspective,” in 2018
IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 620–629, IEEE, 2018.
[96] C. Delimitrou, “The increasing heterogeneity of cloud hardware and
what it means for systems,” 2020.
[97] A. Sampson, W. Dietl, E. Fortuna, D. Gnanapragasam, L. Ceze, and
D. Grossman, “Enerj: Approximate data types for safe and general
low-power computation,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
PLDI, (New York, NY, USA), p. 164–174, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2011.
[98] E. Schulte, J. Dorn, S. Harding, S. Forrest, and W. Weimer, “Postcompiler software optimization for reducing energy,” in Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS, (New
York, NY, USA), p. 639–652, Association for Computing Machinery,
2014.
[99] Q. Wu, M. Martonosi, D. W. Clark, V. J. Reddi, D. Connors, Y. Wu,
J. Lee, and D. Brooks, “A dynamic compilation framework for controlling microprocessor energy and performance,” in Proceedings of
the 38th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO 38, (USA), p. 271–282, IEEE Computer Society, 2005.
[100] Qiang Wu, M. Martonosi, D. W. Clark, V. J. Reddi, D. Connors,
Youfeng Wu, Jin Lee, and D. Brooks, “Dynamic-compiler-driven
control for microprocessor energy and performance,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 119–129, 2006.
[101] Y. S. Shao and D. Brooks, “Energy characterization and instructionlevel energy model of intel’s xeon phi processor,” in Proceedings of the
2013 International Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design
(ISLPED), 2013.
[102] D. Pandiyan and C. J. Wu, “Quantifying the energy cost of data
movement for emerging smart phone workloads on mobile platforms,”
in 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization
(IISWC), 2014.
[103] A. Arunkumar, E. Bolotin, D. Nellans, and C. Wu, “Understanding
the future of energy efficiency in multi-module gpus,” in 2019 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), pp. 519–532, 2019.
[104] D. Shingari, A. Arunkumar, B. Gaudette, S. Vrudhula, and C. Wu,
“Dora: Optimizing smartphone energy efficiency and web browser performance under interference,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium
on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS), pp. 64–75,
2018.
[105] Y. Wang, Q. Xie, A. Ammari, and M. Pedram, “Deriving a near-optimal
power management policy using model-free reinforcement learning and
866
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.bayesian classification,” in Proceedings of the 48th Design Automation
Conference, DAC, (New York, NY, USA), p. 41–46, Association for
Computing Machinery, 2011.
[106] Q. Qiu and M. Pedram, “Dynamic power management based on
continuous-time markov decision processes,” in Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, DAC, (New York,
NY, USA), p. 555–561, Association for Computing Machinery, 1999.
[107] B. Gaudette, C.-J. Wu, and S. Vrudhula, “Optimizing user satisfaction
of mobile workloads subject to various sources of uncertainties,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing (TMC), vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2941–
2953, 2019.
[108] B. Gaudette, C. Wu, and S. Vrudhula, “Improving smartphone user
experience by balancing performance and energy with probabilistic
qos guarantee,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 52–63, 2016.
[109] C. Isci, A. Buyuktosunoglu, C. Cher, P. Bose, and M. Martonosi,
“An analysis of efficient multi-core global power management policies: Maximizing performance for a given power budget,” in 2006
39th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO), pp. 347–358, 2006.
[110] C. Isci, G. Contreras, and M. Martonosi, “Live, runtime phase monitoring and prediction on real systems with application to dynamic
power management,” in 2006 39th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pp. 359–370, 2006.
[111] A. Buyuktosunoglu, S. Schuster, D. Brooks, P. Bose, P. W. Cook,
and D. H. Albonesi, “An adaptive issue queue for reduced power at
high performance,” in Proceedings of the First International Workshop
on Power-Aware Computer Systems-Revised Papers, PACS, (Berlin,
Heidelberg), p. 25–39, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[112] V. Srinivasan, D. Brooks, M. Gschwind, P. Bose, V. Zyuban, P. N.
Strenski, and P. G. Emma, “Optimizing pipelines for power and
performance,” in 35th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, 2002. (MICRO). Proceedings., pp. 333–344, 2002.
[113] K. K. Rangan, G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “Thread motion: Finegrained power management for multi-core systems,” in Proceedings of
the 36th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
ISCA, (New York, NY, USA), p. 302–313, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2009.
[114] R. Teodorescu and J. Torrellas, “Variation-aware application scheduling
and power management for chip multiprocessors,” in 2008 International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 363–374, 2008.
[115] Z. Hu, A. Buyuktosunoglu, V. Srinivasan, V. Zyuban, H. Jacobson, and
P. Bose, “Microarchitectural techniques for power gating of execution
units,” in Proceedings of the 2004 International Symposium on Low
Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), pp. 32–37, 2004.
[116] W. Kim, M. S. Gupta, G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “System level analysis
of fast, per-core dvfs using on-chip switching regulators,” in 2008
IEEE 14th International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), pp. 123–134, IEEE, 2008.
[117] D. Ernst, N. S. Kim, S. Das, S. Pant, R. Rao, T. Pham, C. Ziesler,
D. Blaauw, T. Austin, K. Flautner, et al., “Razor: A low-power pipeline
based on circuit-level timing speculation,” in Proceedings. 36th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2003 (MICRO)., pp. 7–18, IEEE, 2003.
[118] L. Pentecost, M. Donato, B. Reagen, U. Gupta, S. Ma, G.-Y. Wei, and
D. Brooks, “Maxnvm: Maximizing dnn storage density and inference
efficiency with sparse encoding and error mitigation,” in Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pp. 769–781, 2019.
[119] U. Gupta, B. Reagen, L. Pentecost, M. Donato, T. Tambe, A. M. Rush,
G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “Masr: A modular accelerator for sparse
rnns,” in 2019 28th International Conference on Parallel Architectures
and Compilation Techniques (PACT), pp. 1–14, IEEE, 2019.
867
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
