Track & reduce CO₂ emissions from your local computing
Estimate and track carbon emissions from your computer, quantify and analyze their impact.

 DOI OpenSSF Scorecard codecov Discord

A lightweight, easy to use Python library – Simple API to track emissions
Open source, free & community driven – Built by and for the community
Effective visual outputs – Put emissions in context with real-world equivalents
Tracking GenAI API calls? CodeCarbon measures emissions from local computing (your hardware). To track emissions from remote GenAI API calls (OpenAI, Anthropic, Mistral, etc.), use EcoLogits. Both tools are complementary.

Join the community! Have questions, want to share your work, or contribute? Join us on Discord – we're here to help and excited to hear from you!

Installation
pip install codecarbon
If you use Conda:

conda activate your_env
pip install codecarbon
More installation options: installation docs.

Quickstart (Python)
from codecarbon import EmissionsTracker

tracker = EmissionsTracker()
tracker.start()

# Your code here

emissions = tracker.stop()
print(f"Emissions: {emissions} kg CO₂")
Learn more →

Quickstart (CLI)
Track a command without changing your code:

codecarbon monitor --no-api -- python train.py
Detect your hardware:

codecarbon detect
Full CLI guide: CLI tutorial.

Configuration
You can configure CodeCarbon using:

~/.codecarbon.config (global)
./.codecarbon.config (project-local)
CODECARBON_* environment variables
Python arguments (EmissionsTracker(...))
Configuration precedence and examples: configuration guide.

How it works
We created a Python package that estimates your hardware electricity power consumption (GPU + CPU + RAM) and we apply to it the carbon intensity of the region where the computing is done.

CodeCarbon focuses on the main compute components it can measure or estimate directly: CPU, GPU, and RAM. It does not separately model disk I/O, network transfers, displays, cooling, or other peripherals because those sources are usually much smaller for local code-level experiments and are not exposed through the same low-overhead measurement interfaces.

calculation Summary

We explain more about this calculation in the Methodology section of the documentation.

Visualize
You can visualize your experiment emissions on the dashboard or locally with carbonboard.

dashboard

Quick links
Section	Description
Quickstart	Get started in 5 minutes
Installation	Install CodeCarbon
CLI Tutorial	Track emissions from the command line
Python API Tutorial	Track emissions in Python code
Comparing Model Efficiency	Measure carbon efficiency across ML models
API Reference	Full parameter documentation
Framework examples (scikit-learn)	Task-oriented ML framework examples
Methodology	How emissions are calculated
EcoLogits	Track emissions from GenAI API calls
Discord Community	Chat with us and the community
Links
Main website to learn why we do this.
Dashboard to see your emissions.
Documentation to learn how to use the package and our methodology.
EcoLogits to track emissions from GenAI API calls (OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.).
GitHub to look at the source code and contribute.
Discord to chat with us.
Contributing
We are hoping that the open-source community will help us edit the code and make it better!

You are welcome to open issues, even suggest solutions and better still contribute the fix/improvement! We can guide you if you're not sure where to start but want to help us out.

Check out our contribution guidelines.

Feel free to chat with us on Discord.

Citation
If you find CodeCarbon useful for your research, you can find a citation under a variety of formats on Zenodo.

BibTeX
Contact
Feel free to chat with us on Discord.

Codecarbon was formerly developed by volunteers from Mila and the DataForGoodFR community alongside donated professional time of engineers at Comet.ml and BCG GAMMA.

Now CodeCarbon is supported by Code Carbon, a French non-profit organization whose mission is to accelerate the development and adoption of CodeCarbon.

Star History
Star History Chart
