Paris Agreement
Table of Contents
Introduction
Background
Negotiations and agreement
After ratification
(From left) José Gurría, Justin Trudeau, Enrique Peña Nieto, Jim Yong Kim, François Hollande, Angela Merkel, Michelle Bachelet, and Hailemariam Desalegn during the 2015 UN climate change conference that resulted in the Paris Agreement.
Paris Agreement, international treaty, named for the city of Paris, France, in which it was adopted in December 2015, which aimed to reduce the emission of gases that contribute to global warming. The Paris Agreement set out to improve upon and replace the Kyoto Protocol, an earlier international treaty designed to curb the release of greenhouse gases. It entered into force on November 4, 2016, and has been signed by 195 countries and ratified by 190 as of January 2021.

From November 30 to December 11, 2015, France hosted representatives from 196 countries at the United Nations (UN) climate change conference, one of the most important and most ambitious global climate meetings ever assembled. The objective was no less than a binding and universal agreement designed to limit greenhouse gas emissions to levels that would prevent global temperatures from increasing more than 2 °C (3.6 °F) above the temperature benchmark set before the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.

Background
The meeting was part of a process dating back to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, when countries initially joined the international treaty called the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Seeing the need to strengthen emission reductions, in 1997, countries adopted the Kyoto Protocol. That protocol legally bound developed countries to emission reduction targets. However, the agreement was widely believed to be ineffective because the world’s two top carbon dioxide-emitting countries, China and the United States, chose not to participate. China, a developing country, was not bound by the Kyoto Protocol, and many U.S. government officials used this fact to justify U.S. nonparticipation.

At the 18th Conference of the Parties (COP18), held in Doha, Qatar, in 2012, delegates agreed to extend the Kyoto Protocol until 2020. They also reaffirmed their pledge from COP17, which had been held in Durban, South Africa, in 2011, to create a new, comprehensive, legally binding climate treaty by 2015 that would require all countries—including major carbon emitters not abiding by the Kyoto Protocol—to limit and reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.

In the lead-up to the Paris meeting, the UN tasked countries to submit plans detailing how they intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Those plans were technically referred to as intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs). By December 10, 2015, 185 countries had submitted measures to limit or reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 or 2030. The U.S. announced in 2014 its intention to reduce its emissions 26–28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025. To help accomplish that goal, the country’s Clean Power Plan was to set limits on existing and planned power plant emissions. China, the country with the largest total greenhouse gas emissions, set its target for the peaking of its carbon dioxide emissions “around 2030 and making best efforts to peak early.” Chinese officials also endeavoured to lower carbon dioxide emissions per unit of gross domestic product (GDP) by 60–65 percent from the 2005 level.

India’s INDC noted the challenges of eradicating poverty while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. About 24 percent of the global population without access to electricity (304 million) resided in India. Nevertheless, the country planned to “reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 percent by 2030” versus the 2005 levels. The country also sought to derive about 40 percent of its electric power from renewable energy sources rather than from fossil fuels by 2030. The INDC noted that the implementation plans would not be affordable from domestic resources: it estimated that at least $2.5 trillion would be needed to accomplish climate-change actions through 2030. India would achieve that goal with the help of technology transfer (the movement of skills and equipment from more-developed countries to less-developed countries [LDCs]) and international finance, including assistance from the Green Climate Fund (a program designed to assist, through investments in low-emission technologies and climate-resilient development, populations vulnerable to the effects of climate change).

Negotiations and agreement
One of the main sticking points of the negotiations was the issue of transferring funds from developed countries to LDCs, because developed countries did not want to be the only ones paying the costs. Moreover, even if the commitments of the countries were fulfilled, it was unlikely that temperatures would be limited to an increase of 2 °C (3.6 °F). Many countries, especially the island states threatened by rising sea levels, wanted to restrict warming to 1.5 °C (2.7 °F).

After nearly two weeks of difficult negotiations that sometimes lasted through the night, French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, who presided over the talks, announced on December 12 the adoption of the Paris Agreement. He noted that the accord aimed to hold the increase of global temperatures “to well below 2 °C above preindustrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C.” To achieve this objective, he announced that the parties should “aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible…and to undertake rapid reductions thereafter.” The goal was to achieve a balance after 2050 between atmospheric inputs of greenhouse gases by emission sources (such as electrical power plants and engines that burn fossil fuels for energy) and removal into sinks (forests, oceans, and soil, which could be combined with technologies to extract and sequester carbon dioxide from power plants). The agreement also recognized the need of LDCs to improve their economies and reduce poverty, which made immediate reductions in greenhouse gas emissions difficult. As a result, it called on developing countries to enhance their mitigation efforts and move toward emission reduction or limitation targets, while it underscored the need for developed countries to continue to meet their emission reduction targets.

The Paris Agreement specified no new funding targets but noted that developed countries should provide financial resources to help LDCs “in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention,” such as the COP16 commitment of $100 billion per year from developed countries by 2020. (Approximately $10.3 billion had been raised by May 2018.) That funding was to support both mitigation and adaptation efforts. Funding from developed countries would come from a number of different mechanisms, presumably to include grants, equipment, and technical expertise.

The text of the Paris Agreement emphasized cooperation, transparency, flexibility, and regular reporting of progress in achieving the INDCs. There was no mechanism to enforce compliance with the accord’s provisions, but there was to be one to “promote compliance.” That aspect would be achieved via a committee that would function so as to be “transparent, non-adversarial and non-punitive.” The committee would report annually to the COP, and each party was asked to update its INDC every five years. The Paris Agreement was open for signature at United Nations headquarters in New York City from April 22, 2016, to April 21, 2017, and entered into force on November 4, 2016, when 55 parties accounting for at least 55 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions had ratified it.

After ratification
By early 2017 the only sovereign countries that had not signed were Nicaragua and Syria, but that year changes in U.S. climate policy made by Pres. Donald Trump resulted in the country’s formal exit from the agreement on November 4, 2020. The United States’ absence was short-lived, however. On the first day of his term, on January 20, 2021, Pres. Joe Biden reentered the agreement on behalf of the United States, which opened the way for the country’s formal reinstatement in February 2021. Hours after the second inauguration of Donald J. Trump on January 20, 2025, he signed an executive order signaling his intention for the U.S. to again exit the agreement. By January 2025, 195 countries had signed and 195 countries had ratified the agreement.

Since the agreement entered into force, progress toward emission targets has been mixed. Chinese authorities announced that they were making great strides in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, noting that China had met its 2020 commitments in 2017. In contrast, European Union officials announced in 2018 that all member states had fallen behind on reaching their targets; Sweden, Portugal, and France had made the most progress, reaching 77 percent, 66 percent, and 65 percent of their 2020 targets by 2018, respectively. U.S. progress was less clear. Some reports noted that changes in U.S. climate policy were keeping the country from meeting its climate goals, whereas others argued that many individual U.S. cities and states had enacted more stringent greenhouse gas regulations that allowed the country as a whole to remain on track.

Despite such reports, a number of international research organizations noted that carbon emissions continued to increase. The Rhodium Group noted that U.S. emissions had increased 3.4 percent in 2018. The Global Carbon Project (GCP) reported that carbon emissions worldwide, which were largely flat from 2014 to 2016, had increased by 1.6 percent and by 2.7 percent in 2017 and 2018, respectively. The Rhodium Group and the GCP also recorded a decline in carbon emissions by nearly 5 percent in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic as industrial activity slowed; however, emissions increased by roughly the same amount in 2021 with the pandemic’s subsidence and the pace of industrial activity returned to pre-pandemic levels.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
This article was most recently revised and updated by John P. Rafferty.
Citation Information
Article Title: Paris Agreement
Website Name: Encyclopaedia Britannica
Publisher: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.
Date Published: 04 July 2026
URL: https://www.britannica.com/topic/Paris-Agreement-2015
Access Date: July 18, 2026
